# GSoC Mentoring Organization Application

# Profile

## Organization name

illumos

## Description

illumos is a fully open-source effort to produce a reliable, performant, and
scalable operating system with leading-edge technologies and tools. We bring
together a passionate community of developers and a growing base of commercial
participants (Delphix, Joyent, Nexenta, OmniTI, Pluribus, and more).

illumos is the successor to Sun Microsystems' OpenSolaris project. Our culture
draws heavily on the qualities that distinguished Sun engineering culture:
systems engineering (component, interaction, and interface design with a strong
commitment to minimalism), architectural coherence (design cooperation across
subsystems), measurement-driven development (strong visibility tools, mature
methodologies for their use, embedding both thoroughly in the development
process). We have adapted it to work beyond the framework of a single corporate
entity via federated efforts of individuals and companies with distinct
interests in the technology (cloud infrastructure, storage systems, application
servers, and others), sharing an interest in commodity hardware and
production-driven innovation.

illumos features an unparalleled combination of technologies, including the
resilient ZFS storage system, production-safe dynamic tracing (DTrace), FMA
predictive self-healing, the Service Management Framework for persistent
process and boot management, zones for lightweight isolation and
virtualisation, the KVM hypervisor for full system virtualisation, Crossbow for
virtualised networks, a high-performance kernel CIFS/SMB client and server,
boot environments for safe upgrades, and the MDB kernel and application
debugger. All of these subsystems are actively developed by the illumos
project. Both ZFS and DTrace have been ported beyond illumos (notably to
FreeBSD, OS X, and Linux), where our community and sister OpenZFS community
have taken a leading role in coordinating new feature development across
platforms, serving as a reference platform and repository.

## Tags

illumos, operating system, unix, kernel, dtrace, zfs, openzfs, virtualization, device driver, c, python, c++, solaris

## Main license

CDDL

## Logo URL

http://wiki.illumos.org/download/attachments/327686/Phoenix64x64-RGB.png

## Ideas list

[Project Ideas]()

## Mailing list

[illumos Mailing Lists](lists.md)

## Organization website

http://www.illumos.org/

## IRC channel

#illumos on chat.freenode.net

## Feed URL

http://blog.illumos.org/feed/

## Google+ URL

## Twitter URL

https://twitter.com/illumosnews

## Blog page

http://blog.illumos.org/

## Facebook URL

https://www.facebook.com/groups/illumos/

## Veteran organization

Veteran

## Questionnaire

### Why is your organization applying to participate in Google Summer of Code 2014? What do you hope to gain by participating? 

Our previous GSoC efforts have greatly helped bring in talented long-term
contributors, even in addition to the applicants, and break ground in new
areas.  GSoC allows us to work with an excellent talent pool from a much wider
range of institutions and geographies than we could hope to engage otherwise.

Also, GSoC has proven an extremely valuable link to the larger open source
community and a forum to engage on issues like community building and
development process. We hope to recruit new contributors and encourage fresh
ideas, mature our processes, and deepen our ties to similarly minded open
source communities.

### How many potential mentors do you have for this year's program? What criteria did you use to select them? 

We have confirmed the availability of three mentors  so far, with more selected
from established contributors and reviewers, drawing heavily on "advocates",
senior community members who ensure that changes are well-defined, tested, and
reviewed before they are integrated. Without explicitly requiring it, we have
also drawn more or less exclusively on community members with professional
experience of development for our project.

### What is your plan for dealing with disappearing students? 

We require students to report progress weekly via our developer list and to
provide prompt updates to their mentors whenever they experience setbacks.
Students are told that their proposal schedules and deliverables are considered
contracts: renegotiation is acceptable if it happens as unforeseen issues
arise, but waiting for evaluations to raise significant issues is considered a
breach and grounds for a failing evaluation. We've found a reasonable
compromise with less frequent but regular check-ins with their mentors still
allows students some flexibility in using their time while remaining
accountable to the proposed schedule. We've considered publicly visible
repositories during the program as an option, though not a requirement for all
students.

### What is your plan for dealing with disappearing mentors? 

Org admins monitor for mentor responses to student updates to the developer
list and regularly poll mentors to make sure that they have reasonably current
status from students, are seeing working product to back that up, and are
either satisfied with progress or have conversations promptly about issues. We
also make sure that all mentors have back-ups who are kept in the loop on the
above, as professional and personal obligations may require mentors to "tag
out". We also encourage students to conduct most discussion in one of our open
forums, so that others in the community can help them in addition to their
mentor.

### What steps will you take to encourage students to interact with your project's community before and during the program?

We have basic policies that require students to interact with mentors via
developer IRC channels and mailing lists. Students are expected to take the
initiative to familiarise themselves with the community, participate in
discussions, and eventually become regular members through the program: not
everything has to happen in the open, but students have to show that they are
comfortable and proficient identifying themselves and talking about their work
via community channels. Mentors are expected to guide students through
community processes for peer review and integration.

### What will you do to encourage your accepted students to stick with the project after Google Summer of Code concludes?

We treat students like regular community members, and our hope and expectation
is that students who function well in that context and produce work they can be
proud of will continue doing so. Many of our participants in previous years
were students who had previous exposure to our community or were working with
our code base in their coursework, and these students have unsurprisingly shown
much greater ongoing affinity for and ongoing commitment to our project than
students without, who tend to be active only for one summer.

### Are you a new organization who has a Googler or other organization to vouch for you? If so, please list their name(s) here.

### Are you an established or larger organization who would like to vouch for a new organization applying this year? If so, please list their name(s) here.

### If you chose "veteran" in the dropdown above, please summarize your involvement and the successes and challenges of your participation. Please also list your pass/fail rate for each year.

In our first year we passed all of our students but had a nevertheless mixed
experience: students were in India and mentors in California, and students were
undergraduates with less previous experience in our field of development.

We had a more structured and satisfying experience for students, mentors, and
the community generally in 2012, recruiting students with stronger backgrounds,
who were able to function independently and delivered superior results
(accepted proposals demonstrated far greater expertise and preparation,
projects deliverables stayed on track or were more clearly renegotiated as
issues arose, outcomes were more consistent with proposals).

Last year, we a selected three from a healthy number of strong proposals
(though we probably received proportionally more "spammy" submissions as well!)
from qualified students. The work was definitely of excellent quality and
definitely consistent with the proposals, but we were overly ambitious about
scope. Our mentors encountered more difficulty getting students to stay on
schedule towards the conclusion of the development phase, primarily not due to
the fault of the students themselves but our own difficulty in estimating the
increase in time involved in testing and reviewing substantial changes with
inherently higher risk. As a result, we will be sizing projects less
ambitiously and providing feedback to applicants for pre-integration testing
plans in their applications.

We are happy to say that despite occasional setbacks, all of our students
selected so far have passed.

### If you are a new organization, have you applied in the past? If so, for what year(s)?
