# GSoC Student Expectations

1. Your proposal is your contract
1. Don't get lost
 1. Blog weekly to report progress
 1. Push on a regular schedule every few days
 1. Write design notes for review
 1. Get weekly review on code and design
 1. Identify blockers immediately
1. Bond
 1. Get your contribution through to RTI
 1. Keep working on bite-sized bugs
 1. With feedback from your mentor, identify background reading assignments for the bonding period
 1. Spend time on #illumos

We don't want students to disappear and end up at risk of failure. We're
therefore setting up a number of protocols to help us keep track of progress on
a day-to-day basis without too much overhead. There are a number of further
things you can do to help yourself out. Get on the #illumos IRC channel and get
to know the developers who are active there. Our developer community is an
essential part of the larger mentor community supporting your project, so
please consider the mailing list and IRC first-instance resource for general
requests.

Proposals should be considered a contract: they can be renegotiated, but you
can't fail to deliver. If you need to make changes, indicate that promptly and
make sure that the changes have been notified to and approved by your primary
mentor and the org admins (Bayard and Albert).

An illumos-gsoc organization has been created on GitHub, and WIP repos are
being created for each project. Updates to the WIP are your basic keepalive:
you should be pushing every day or two whenever you are coding. If you are
going to miss a push or have one, please send notification to your primary
mentor and the org admins, preferably in advance, explaining the circumstances.

The repos should also include documentation for your project, such as design
notes. Because they are WIPs, the repos are private. Reviews should be done
using webrevs. You will be given accounts on dev1.illumos.org to allow you to
publish code for review using webrevs. 

Every week you should provide a blog post describing progress and a webrev of
any code done that week, sending URLs to developer@. The first post, which
should be made during the bonding period, should be the project schedule and
deliverables so that the developer community is aware of what you will be
doing.

You cannot miss these weekly progress reports except by prior arrangement or in
case of legitimate emergency.

If there are any slips against the project schedule, you should identify them
in these posts the week they happen.

If you encounter blockers, mail the developer list and ask on #illumos to
request assistance ASAP. First-instance support for blockers should be from the
developer community and not tied to any individual unless there is a clear
reason for this and preferably prior agreement.

If you haven't already, create accounts for yourself on GitHub and the illumos
[bug tracker](https://bugs.illumos.org).
