# Google Summer of Code

Weâ€™re happy to announce that the illumos project has been accepted as a
mentoring organization for the [2017 Google Summer of
Code](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/) (this marks our third year of
participation in GSoC).

The illumos project is a community-driven open source operating system
development project derived from the former OpenSolaris project.

Google's Summer of Code program promotes student involvement in open source
communities by sponsoring summer internships for students to work on projects
like illumos.  Members of the illumos community (including Joyent, Nexenta,
OmniTI and others) support this program by offering experienced staff members
willing to mentor student projects.   If you might like to apply for one of
these internships, or just want to learn more about our involvement in this
program, please see the illumos GSoC page. OpenIndiana is also participating,
under the illumos umbrella.

## For Students

!!! note "New to illumos?"
    Start with [How To Build illumos](../developers/index.md) and
    [How To Contribute](../contributing/index.md).

If you're interested in helping illumos or OpenIndiana in this year's Summer of
Code, we require you to sign up on our [developer list](../community/lists.md).

Students are expected to interact as normal contributors through existing
community channels, including [mail and IRC](../community/lists.md), so dive on
in!

We encourage you to drop by #illumos on freenode to ask questions or get to
know us.

Students can officially begin discussing project ideas with us at any time, and
submit applications between Mar 20 and Apr. 3 (see other important dates in the
[full timeline for GSoC
2017](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/dashboard/timeline/)).

Nothing prohibits motivated students from spending time before the application
period getting to know the community and the code, installing a distribution,
building from source, and fixing some [bite-sized
bugs](https://www.illumos.org/projects/illumos-gate/issues?query_id=15).

Starting from March 20, you can apply at [illumos Google Summer of Code
page](https://summerofcode.withgoogle.com/organizations/5496396338692096/).

If you're not sure what your proposal should include we will be happy to help
if you ask the mailing list or IRC for feedback.

## Think Long-Term

illumos is an open-source, community-based project, but it also has commercial
supporters who employ contributors to our project. If operating systems
development is really what interests you, consider this a first step toward a
possible career with us.

Our development community includes people who came to work at the commercial
organization that supported our predecessor project as summer interns. They
were excited enough by what they saw that they started work right out of
college and followed us into our current incarnation. For a (colorful) history
of the project from one of those interns, visit [Bryan Cantrill's LISA
presentation](http://smartos.org/2011/12/15/fork-yeah-the-rise-and-development-of-illumos-2/).

## Project ideas

Our [Project Ideas]() are a launch pad for student proposals, not a fixed menu
of options. Put time in with the community, learn how what we're doing fits
your interests and skills and write a proposal that reflects that. We welcome
original project proposals, particularly those that demonstration familiarity
with the project and alignment with career interests, previous course of study,
and practical experience. When writing your proposal, make use of our
suggestions for [how to write an excellent GSoC
proposal](https://wiki.illumos.org/display/illumos/How+to+write+an+excellent+GSoC+proposal).

## Application template

Please use our [GSoC Application Template](gsoc-application.md) in preparing
your application.

## Mentoring resources

If you need help finding or contacting a possible mentor, please contact the
org admins:

* Gordon Ross <gordon.w.ross@gmail.com> 
* Hans Rosenfeld <rosenfeld@grumpf.hope-2000.org> 
